docs/orm/migrations.md, before:

# Database Migration Guide

Maintaining a production-grade database requires moving away from `npx prisma db push` (which can cause data loss) to **Prisma Migrate** (which tracks incremental changes via SQL files).

This guide explains how to manage schema updates professionally, translating Rails-style migration discipline into the Node.js / Prisma ecosystem.

---

## The Migration Workflow

NodeLLM's ORM schema will evolve over time (e.g., adding "Extended Thinking" support). To update your application without losing user chat history, follow this workflow.

### 1. Update the Schema
Modify your `prisma/schema.prisma` with the new fields or models (or copy the latest version from `@node-llm/orm/schema.prisma`).

### 2. Generate a Migration
Instead of pushing directly to the DB, generate a versioned migration file:

```bash
npx prisma migrate dev --name add_thinking_support
```

**What this does:**
- Detects the difference between your `schema.prisma` and your actual database.
- Creates a new folder in `prisma/migrations/` containing a `migration.sql` file.
- Applies that SQL to your local database.

### 3. Commit the Migration
**Crucial**: Always commit the `prisma/migrations` folder to your version control. This ensures all environments (staging, production) apply the exact same SQL changes.

---

## Baseline: Moving from `db push` to `migrate`

If you have been using `db push` and now want to start using formal migrations without losing data:

1. **Clear Drift**: Ensure your database and schema are currently in sync via one last `db push`.
2. **Baseline**: Initialize the migration history by marking the current state as the "initial" version:

```bash
mkdir -p prisma/migrations/0_init
npx prisma migrate diff \
  --from-empty \
  --to-schema-datamodel prisma/schema.prisma \
  --script > prisma/migrations/0_init/migration.sql

npx prisma migrate resolve --applied 0_init
```

---

## Deployment to Production

In production, **never** use `migrate dev`. Instead, use the deployment command which applies all pending migrations in the migrations folder:

```bash
npx prisma migrate deploy
```

---

## Common Scenarios

### Renaming a Column
If you rename a column (e.g., `reasoning` to `thinkingText`), Prisma might try to drop the old column and create a new one, causing data loss.

To fix this:
1. Run `npx prisma migrate dev --name rename_reasoning --create-only`.
2. Open the generated `.sql` file.
3. Replace the `DROP` and `ADD` commands with an `ALTER TABLE ... RENAME COLUMN ...` command.
4. Run `npx prisma migrate dev` to apply your edited SQL.

### Adding Required Fields
When adding a required (`non-nullable`) field to a table with existing data:
1. Generate the migration with `--create-only`.
2. Edit the SQL to provide a default value for existing rows or make it nullable temporarily.
3. Apply the migration.

Commit message:

Update ORM documentation with new CLI sync and discovery commands

docs/orm/migrations.md, after:

# Database Migration Guide

Maintaining a production-grade database requires moving away from `npx prisma db push` (which can cause data loss) to **Prisma Migrate** (which tracks incremental changes via SQL files).

This guide explains how to manage schema updates professionally, translating Rails-style migration discipline into the Node.js / Prisma ecosystem.

---

## The Migration Workflow

NodeLLM's ORM schema will evolve over time (e.g., adding "Extended Thinking" support). To update your application without losing user chat history, follow this workflow.

### 1. Detect Changes (CLI)

The easiest way to check if your existing database is missing columns for new NodeLLM features is to use the **ORM CLI Sync**:

```bash
npx @node-llm/orm sync
```

**What this does:**
- Scans your `prisma/schema.prisma`.
- Identifies missing fields (like `thinkingText` or `thoughtSignature`).
- Provides guidance on the specific columns to add.

### 2. Update the Schema manually
Modify your `prisma/schema.prisma` with the new fields or models (or copy the latest version from `@node-llm/orm/schema.prisma`).

### 3. Generate a Migration
Instead of pushing directly to the DB, generate a versioned migration file:

```bash
npx prisma migrate dev --name add_thinking_support
```

**What this does:**
- Detects the difference between your `schema.prisma` and your actual database.
- Creates a new folder in `prisma/migrations/` containing a `migration.sql` file.
- Applies that SQL to your local database.

### 3. Commit the Migration
**Crucial**: Always commit the `prisma/migrations` folder to your version control. This ensures all environments (staging, production) apply the exact same SQL changes.

---

## Baseline: Moving from `db push` to `migrate`

If you have been using `db push` and now want to start using formal migrations without losing data:

1. **Clear Drift**: Ensure your database and schema are currently in sync via one last `db push`.
2. **Baseline**: Initialize the migration history by marking the current state as the "initial" version:

```bash
mkdir -p prisma/migrations/0_init
npx prisma migrate diff \
  --from-empty \
  --to-schema-datamodel prisma/schema.prisma \
  --script > prisma/migrations/0_init/migration.sql

npx prisma migrate resolve --applied 0_init
```

---

## Deployment to Production

In production, **never** use `migrate dev`. Instead, use the deployment command which applies all pending migrations in the migrations folder:

```bash
npx prisma migrate deploy
```

---

## Common Scenarios

### Renaming a Column
If you rename a column (e.g., `reasoning` to `thinkingText`), Prisma might try to drop the old column and create a new one, causing data loss.

To fix this:
1. Run `npx prisma migrate dev --name rename_reasoning --create-only`.
2. Open the generated `.sql` file.
3. Replace the `DROP` and `ADD` commands with an `ALTER TABLE ... RENAME COLUMN ...` command.
4. Run `npx prisma migrate dev` to apply your edited SQL.

### Adding Required Fields
When adding a required (`non-nullable`) field to a table with existing data:
1. Generate the migration with `--create-only`.
2. Edit the SQL to provide a default value for existing rows or make it nullable temporarily.
3. Apply the migration.
