docs/advanced/multi_provider_parallel.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Parallel Execution
parent: Advanced
nav_order: 10
description: Learn how to safely run multiple LLM providers concurrently using NodeLLM’s scoped context system to avoid global state race conditions.
---

# {{ page.title }}
{: .no_toc }

{{ page.description }}
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

## The Problem
\`NodeLLM\` is a singleton. When calling \`NodeLLM.configure({ provider: '...' })\` in parallel (e.g., inside \`Promise.all\`), one provider call could "overwrite" the provider for another call, leading to race conditions.

## The Solution
Added a `.withProvider()` method to `NodeLLM`. This returns a **scoped copy** of the LLM instance that is isolated from the global singleton state.

---

## How to use it

### 1. Configure once globally
```javascript
import { NodeLLM } from "@node-llm/core";

NodeLLM.configure((config) => {
  config.openaiApiKey = "...";
  config.anthropicApiKey = "...";
  config.geminiApiKey = "...";
});
```

### 2. Run in parallel safely
```javascript
const [score1, score2, score3] = await Promise.all([
  NodeLLM.withProvider("openai").chat("gpt-4o").ask(prompt),
  NodeLLM.withProvider("anthropic").chat("claude-3").ask(prompt),
  NodeLLM.withProvider("gemini").chat("gemini-2.0").ask(prompt),
]);
```

## Benefits
✅ **Singleton maintained**: No need to use `new NodeLLM()` unless you want to.  
✅ **Race condition solved**: Each `.withProvider()` call creates an isolated context.  
✅ **Clean syntax**: Chaining `.withProvider().chat().ask()` is intuitive and elegant.  
✅ **Automatic key sharing**: Scoped instances inherit the global API keys by default.

## Example
Check out `examples/parallel-scoring-clean.mjs` for a working demonstration.

Commit message:

Move away from singleton architecture

docs/advanced/multi_provider_parallel.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Parallel Execution
parent: Advanced
nav_order: 10
description: Learn how to safely run multiple LLM providers concurrently using NodeLLM’s scoped context system to avoid global state race conditions.
---

# {{ page.title }}
{: .no_toc }

{{ page.description }}
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

## The Problem
In previous versions, `NodeLLM` was a mutable singleton. Calling `NodeLLM.configure()` concurrently could lead to race conditions where one request would overwrite the configuration of another.

## The Solution
As of v1.5.4, `NodeLLM` is a **frozen, immutable instance**. It cannot be mutated at runtime. For parallel execution with different providers or configurations, you use **context branching** via `.withProvider()` or create independent instances via `createLLM()`.

---

## How to use it

### 1. Simple Parallel Calls
The most elegant way to run multiple providers is using `.withProvider()`. This creates a scoped, isolated instance for that specific call.

```javascript
import { NodeLLM } from "@node-llm/core";

const [score1, score2, score3] = await Promise.all([
  NodeLLM.withProvider("openai").chat("gpt-4o").ask(prompt),
  NodeLLM.withProvider("anthropic").chat("claude-3-5-sonnet").ask(prompt),
  NodeLLM.withProvider("gemini").chat("gemini-2.0-flash").ask(prompt),
]);
```


## Benefits
✅ **Singleton maintained**: No need to use `new NodeLLM()` unless you want to.  
✅ **Race condition solved**: Each `.withProvider()` call creates an isolated context.  
✅ **Clean syntax**: Chaining `.withProvider().chat().ask()` is intuitive and elegant.  
✅ **Automatic key sharing**: Scoped instances inherit the global API keys by default.

## Example
Check out `examples/parallel-scoring-clean.mjs` for a working demonstration.
